.. post:: 2020-10-02
   :tags: conda-forge
   :author: isuru

.. role:: raw-html(raw)
   :format: html

macOS ARM builds on conda-forge
===============================

A new platform ``osx-arm64`` has been added to the build matrix of conda-forge.
``osx-arm64`` packages are built to run on upcoming macOS arm64 processors marketed
as ``Apple Silicon``. An installer for this platform can be found 
`here <https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge/releases/latest/download/Miniforge3-MacOSX-arm64.sh>`_.

This will install a conda environment with python and conda in it. Installed conda
will be able to install packages like ``numpy, scipy``. Currently there are about
100 packages out of 10000 packages pre-built for this platform.

All these packages are built on conda-forge's current macOS ``x86_64`` infrastructure.
In order to do so, we have made lots of changes to the infrastructure including,
``conda, conda-build, conda-smithy, constructor, conda-forge-ci-setup`` to facilitate
cross-compiling which is the process of compiling a package that will run on a
``host`` platform (``osx-arm64`` in our case), with the compilation done on a
``build`` platform (``osx-64`` or ``linux-64`` in our case).

``osx-arm64`` is the first conda platform that is completely
bootstrapped using conda-build's cross-compiling facility. Previously, when adding
a new platform, conda-build was built with an existing python and pip environment
on the new platform. With cross-compiling, when the compilers and a sysroot is set up
on a different platform, an existing conda-build installation (on ``osx-64``
and ``linux-64`` in this case) will be able to start building packages right away.

Cross-compiling builds for ``osx-arm64``
----------------------------------------

In order to cross compile packages for ``osx-arm64`` we need compilers. So, we first
built ``clang=11.0.0.rc1`` which has support for targetting ``osx-arm64``. We also
built ``compiler-rt=11.0.0.rc1`` as a universal build support both ``osx-64`` and
``osx-arm64``.

Linker, archiver, ``otool``, ``install_name_tool`` was built using the
`cctools-port project <https://github.com/tpoechtrager/cctools-port>`_  by Thomas Pöchtrager.
These 
One issue we ran into was that the macOS 11.0 Big Sur Beta 7 required that all
executables and shared libraries be ad-hoc signed which is signing without a
verified signature. On suggestion of ``cctools-port`` developer we added support
to ``cctools-port`` to sign these executables using ``ldid`` which can be used
on Linux as well as macOS to sign.

Using these, the first cross compiled package we built was ``libcxx`` to facilitate
C++ builds. For the ``osx-arm64`` sysroot we used the ``MacOSX11.0.sdk`` already
installed on Azure pipelines and Travis-CI. Due to licensing issues, we cannot
distribute this, but it can be downloaded from the Apple developer website
even on Linux.

With clang we have a C/C++ compiler, but lack a Fortran compiler.
We used the `GCC fork for darwin-arm64 <https://github.com/iains/gcc-darwin-arm64>`_.
First, a cross compiler (``build == host != target``) was built. Using that compiler,
we built a ``cross-native`` compiler (``build != host == target``) which gave use the
shared libraries like ``libgfortran.dylib``.

We also added support for cross compiling rust programs to the rust packages
in conda and installing ``rust_osx-64`` on Linux will give you a compiler that will
build packages for ``osx-64``.

As we haven't done cross-compilation before, many packages needed to be updated.
Most were trivial changes that we automated later on. These included getting a newer
``config.sub`` to identify the new autotools platform ``arm64-apple-darwin20.0.0``,
adding options to CMake with the environment variable ``CMAKE_ARGS`` to correctly
set up the toolchain and recipes were update to use ``cmake ${CMAKE_ARGS} ..``.
Running tests when building were also disabled by guarding commands like
``make check``, ``make test``, ``ctest`` with the env variable
``CONDA_BUILD_CROSS_COMPILATION``.

Cross-compiling python extensions is quite tricky as ``distutils`` is not really
setup to do this. Thanks to the project `crossenv <https://github.com/benfogle/crossenv>`_
this is unofficially supported with a few quirks. With ``crossenv``, we can run a
python on the build machine (``osx-64`` or ``linux-64`` in this case) that acts like
it is on ``osx-arm64``. ``crossenv`` monkey-patches a few functions like
``os.uname`` and sets up values like ``_PYTHON_SYSCONFIG_DATA`` to make python
running on ``osx-64`` or ``linux-64`` behave like ``osx-arm64``. One issue is that,
monkey-patching ``sys.platform`` doesn't work and therefore if a python package
in it's ``setup.py`` uses ``sys.platform`` to differentiate OSes this will lead
to unintended consequences if you are cross-compiling from ``linux-64``.
Therefore, we have to use ``osx-64`` as our ``build`` system when cross-compiling
for ``osx-arm64``.
Note that packages using ``sysconfig.get_platform()`` will get the correct platform.


How to add a ``osx-arm64`` build to a feedstock
-----------------------------------------------

All the below changes will be done by a bot and the packages the bot
will send PRs to is determined by the list of packages at
`conda-forge-pinning <https://github.com/conda-forge/conda-forge-pinning-feedstock/blob/master/recipe/migrations/osx_arm64.txt>`_
and their dependences.

Add the following to ``conda-forge.yml`` (on Linux or OSX),

.. code-block:: yaml

   build_platform:
     osx_arm64: osx_64
   test_on_native_only: true

You can rerender using,

.. code-block:: bash

   conda smithy rerender

For python packages, add the following to ``recipe/meta.yaml``,

.. code-block:: yaml

  requirements:
    build:
      - python                                 # [build_platform != target_platform]
      - cross-python_{{ target_platform }}     # [build_platform != target_platform]
      - cython                                 # [build_platform != target_platform]
      - numpy                                  # [build_platform != target_platform]
      - pybind11                               # [build_platform != target_platform]

For autotools package, add the following to ``recipe/meta.yaml``,

.. code-block:: yaml
 
   requirements:
     build:
       - libtool   # [unix]

and to ``recipe/build.sh``,

.. code-block:: bash

   # Get an updated config.sub and config.guess
   cp $BUILD_PREFIX/share/libtool/build-aux/config.* .

For cmake packages, add the following to ``recipe/build.sh``,

.. code-block:: bash

   cmake ${CMAKE_ARGS} ..

For rust packages, add the following to ``recipe/meta.yaml``,

.. code-block:: bash

   requirements:
     build:
       - {{ compiler('rust') }}

If there's a line like ``make check`` in ``recipe/build.sh`` that cannot be
run when cross-compiling, do the following,

.. code-block:: bash

   if [[ "$CONDA_BUILD_CROSS_COMPILATION" != "1" ]]; then
     make check
   fi

After these changes, another rerendering might be required.

Building locally
----------------

For building locally add the following in ``$HOME/conda_build_config.yaml``.

.. code-block:: yaml

   SDKROOT:
     - /path/to/MacOSX11.0.sdk

After that, look for the config you want to run  in ``.ci_support`` folder
in the root of the feedstock
For eg: ``.ci_support/osx_arm64_.yaml``. Then run,

.. code-block:: bash

   conda build recipe -m .ci_support/osx_arm64_.yaml -c https://conda-web.anaconda.org/conda-forge -c conda-forge/label/rust_dev

This should start a new build for ``osx-arm64``.

Testing packages
----------------

In order to test packages intended to run on future Apple Silicon hardware,
Apple provides a machine called Developer Transition Kit (DTK). Jonathan Helmus
and Eli Rykoff has helped with testing these packages on DTKs.
Thanks to Eli Rykoff, we are now running tests for these packages as a daily
cron job which has led to finding several bugs in our cross compiling infrastructure
and also bugs in our recipes.

This work would not have been possible without the help of many people
including the upstream maintainers of conda, conda-build, cctools, tapi, cctools-port,
ldid, llvm, clang, crossenv, rust, gfortran-darwin-arm64,
``conda-forge/help-osx-arm64`` team including Matt Becker and Uwe Korn who sent
PRs to fix recipes, ``conda-forge/bot`` team and also all the conda-forge maintainers
of the 100 feedstocks who reviewed and fixed PRs.

Isuru Fernando
